--lead
Why Do We Work?

----break----
--intro

# What's this newsletter about, anyway?
We're several newsletters in, so it's probably time for me to talk a little bit more about where we're headed. Here's the basic idea: I want to write about stuff here that I can't anywhere else, which means you'll find a lot of my random thoughts about life and business and relationships. I also wanted a place where I can gather all the content I've created elsewhere&mdash;in podcasts, blog posts, interviews, or whatever else. And finally, I'll be writing a book this year, and I wanted to give you first access to some content from the book.

A WHAT? Yep. I'm writing a book. It's called [**Laravel: Up and Running**](http://laravelupandrunning.com/), and as you can guess, it'll be a book for helping folks new to Laravel get up and running quickly and efficiently. And I'll be trying out some of my content here first.

***

If you missed the last issue of this newsletter, check it out here: [The Thin Line Between Confidence and Pride](https://send.mattstauffer.co/w/h73dP0BmIq8eIEEATkWf1A).

This week, I'm talking about why we do what we do.

----break----
--article

## Why Do We Work?
***
As I was recording [a recent episode of the Five-Minute Geek Show](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/47), I asked my son, "Why does daddy go to work?" His answer: "to make money so we can go to the store to buy food" (he also mentioned going to the playground, but that's free, so let's just pretend that part didn't happen).

My wife and I often laugh about the fact that we're teaching him such a simple mindset regarding work. Of course I receive rewards from my work other than just money, and I hope to teach him more and more about that over time. But right now, he needs to know that daddy is leaving him at home for nine hours a day for a good reason, and this is the easiest way to pass that information along.

This prompted me, however, to consider why it is I'm doing what I do. What motivates me to do my job? I can think of a few answers.

***

### I need money.
Plain. Simple. I want to eat and I want my family to eat.

Not only that, but I want to be able to provide a measure of stability for my family. It has been proven again and again that children need predictability and stability in their family environent in order to thrive, and I'd suggest that the same is true for adults. When you spend your time worrying about where your next meal is coming from, you're less capable of engaging fully with what's in front of you&mdash;[Maslow's hierarchy of needs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maslow's_hierarchy_of_needs) and all that.

And, just like Maslow's hierarchy, this is why "money" is the first motivation I'm sharing. If I wasn't being fulfilled by my work, if I wasn't able to serve others with my work, if I wasn't able to do any other of the things I value through my work, I would still go to work in order to provide for myself and my family. But that's not all.

### I love what I do.
I love programming. I've had the good fortune to find great work in a field that gives me joy.

When I first got married, my wife was understandably confused by a lot of my behaviors. One thing that really threw her off was the fact that I spent so much time on the computer when I *wasn't* at work. Plus, the fact that I sometimes weird hours didn't help matters. But what finally came up was this:

"Matt, I see you on the computer, writing code, when we should be relaxing together. That tells me you're doing work. Am I wrong?"

And the answer was: Yep. My day job is writing code. But my primary hobby is... writing code.

Granted, the code I write in the evenings is different than the code I write during the day. I pick different projects, take different roles in the projects, and at times when my day job becomes more about meetings than coding, it can be a relief to just open up an IDE at the end of the day.

I'm part of a small subset of the world that has actually been actually successful at fulfilling that old school counselor's suggestion: I found the thing I would do for free, and then finagled a way to get paid for doing it.

### I love serving others.
One of my greatest joys in life is helping others. And, whether or not we realize it, there's a lot of opportunity in every job to help others. The more power you have in your role, the more chance you have to help others.

Working on a client project? I'm serving my clients and trying to make their lives better. Pair programming? I'm serving the other developer (and they're serving me). Meeting with my business partner Dan? We're working on how we can serve our customers and employees. Working on my blog and teaching at conferences? I'm trying to serve the community around me.

Writing this newsletter? I'm trying to serve you. I want this newsletter to make your life better.

***

### Creators Gotta Create
But there's one piece I've missed here, and it's a fundamental piece of this conversation: humans are made to be productive. The urge to create and build and change and *do* is hard-wired into our brains, and while there's certainly space for relaxation and vacation, we're not built for doing *nothing*. Go watch *WALL-E* if you need a reminder of that.

If you've listened to the radio in the last 10 years, you've probably heard the Switchfoot song "Meant To Live." Here are a few lines:

> We were meant to live for so much more  
> Have we lost ourselves?  
> Somewhere we live inside  

There's a reason this song has become so popular, and it's not just because Jon Foreman is dreamy. We all have a part of us that yearns for more than just life-as-usual. The idea of a 9-5 in the suburbs has become the way we describe life-as-usual, but to be honest, I don't think that's it at all. What bores us is when nothing ever changes and when nothing matters, and that's not limited to the suburbs.

This is why I work. Returning to Maslow's hierarchy of needs, the top of the pyramid is "Self-actualization." Our instinct may be to read that as "Be everything you can be"&mdash;which is certainly important, but also very self-focused. But there's another important aspect to this: *Do* everything you can do. Accomplish everything you can. Make the change that you need and want to make.

I work because I want to leave this world a better place, and my work&mdash;the creative, productive, others-serving enterprise that I somehow miraculously get paid to participate in&mdash;is one of the primary ways I plan to do so.


----break----

--intro

Thanks for reading. I hope you loved the article, and if you did, please share it with your friends.

Check out what I've been up to lately:

----break----
--postlist

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 49](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/49)

--post--
### [Sublime Text (3) for PHP Developers](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/sublime-text-3-for-php-developers)

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 48](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/48)

--post--
### [Laravel Podcast Episode 30](http://www.laravelpodcast.com/episodes/13327-episode-30-trouble-trouble-trouble)

--post--
### [Better Integration Testing in Laravel 5.1: DatabaseMigrations, DatabaseTransactions, and WithoutMiddleware](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/better-integration-testing-in-laravel-5.1-databasemigrations-databasetransactions-and-withoutmiddleware)

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 47](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/47)

--post--
### [Better Integration Testing in Laravel 5.1: Model Factories](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/better-integration-testing-in-laravel-5.1-model-factories)

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 46](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/46)

--post--
### [Better Integration Testing in Laravel 5.1: Powerful Integration Tests in A Few Lines](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/better-integration-testing-in-laravel-5.1-powerful-integration-tests-in-a-few-lines)

