--lead
Priorities and free time.

----break----
--intro

# A brief hiatus
If you're reading this newsletter via the archives, you can skip this right now. But if you're reading this the day it came out, you might wonder where I've been for a few months.

Welp. Turns out speaking at a few conferences (Laracon US, Laracon Eu, and ZendCon) and writing a book ([**Laravel: Up and Running**](http://laravelupandrunning.com/)), hosting two podcasts, running a business, and, you know, having a family can actually consume quite a bit of your time.

I'm on my flight to ZendCon right now, and I have no more conferences lined up for at least a few months, so here's hoping that next week will be the start of me being more on top of my newsletter, podcasts, and blog. :crosses fingers:

***

If you missed the last issue of this newsletter, check it out here: [@TODO](@TODO).

This week, I'm talking about how I prioritize my time.

----break----
--article

On the way to the Orlando airport this morning, I listened to the most recent three episodes (58, 59, and 60) of [the Bootstrapped podcast](http://bootstrapped.fm). The hosts, Ian and Andrey, have a bit of a running conversation where they talk about how hard it is to find time to do all the things on our plates with kids, jobs, etc.; Andrey will often say, "I just don't have any time"... and then Ian points out that Andrey has just described playing dozens of hours of video games since the last podcast.

You could look at that statement and make a lot of assumptions. You could assume Andrey is lazy (he's not.) You could assume he doesn't do his work well (he does.) You might assume he's not attentive to his family (he is.) In reality, the only thing you can rightly assume is that *Andrey enjoys playing video games and has made that a priority in his life.* It's one of the things I love about him, actually--that he's so unapologetic about his decisions, whatever they are. He made them, and that they're not the same decisions *you* might've made is almost entirely inconsequential.

***

Another example: I always used to talk to my wife about how I just don't have enough time to go to the gym. I wish I were in better shape, but how do I have time? I have too may things on my plate.

She'd always give me a sideways glance, say something like "Mhm," and keep doing whatever else she was doing. Over years of this same exchange happening over and over, I realized it's not that I don't have *time* for the gym; it's that the gym isn't a high enough *priority* to merit so much of my time.

I have enough time to play with my son, spend time with my wife, work around the house; I have enough time to record the Five-Minute Geek Show and the Laravel Podcast and work on my book and my blog, enough time to work and go to church and sleep. I even have enough time to occasionally have lunch or a late-night Starbucks hacking session with my friends.

There is time for pretty much anything I want to do. The question is, is it a high enough priority for me to push something else down the list of Things To Do With My Time? I don't have unlimited time, so some things will make the cut and others won't.

***

We talk to clients often about almost exactly this same concept. Many clients come into talks with Tighten asking for estimates, timelines, plans, and promises. The conversations often start like this: "How long will this take? When will it be done?" When Tighten talks about project planning and priorities for our clients, we shift the conversation to sound more like this: "How long do you want us to work on it and what are your priorities during that time?"

We can't predict how long every little piece of a project will take. And there's no way to know *exactly which tasks* will be required, *how they'll be prioritized*, or *which tasks depend on which other tasks*. Sure, we can use our experience and training to give the best guesses we can. But an estimate is just that--a guess. The only useful approaches to project planning consider that all of these guesses are *only* guesses and instead build processes that allow for our understanding of these things to change.

Clients wanting to add a new feature mid-project is a dread and a joke among developers everywhere. "Oh, just add this one thing. It shouldn't take too long." Dread. But with an agile development approach, new features are just fine. We have a Trello board open with the stories or tasks that come next in the project, and we just ask the client to place the new feature request wherever they want in the priority list. If they place it at the top, they actually see the Trello cards for other features move down in priority. If they place it at the bottom, they know that it might never happen, or may extend the length of time they'll need to keep our services engaged. There's an imaginary, magic red line on every task list that represents the place at which the features below the line are no longer valuable enough to merit their development cost.

Developers are not the right people to make the decisions about how clients want to spend their money, and they're especially not the right people to be held accountable for those decisions. Instead, we like to set up systems that help and encourage clients to establish and communicate their priorities to us and our developers. And then we always do our work accordingly.

***

I do have time for the gym. I started going to the gym five days a week in November of last year. It takes about an hour and a half out of my day, between an hour-long workout, changing, and showering. That's an hour and a half I could be having time to myself, or sleeping, or working around the house. That's an hour and a half I could be working on my book. That's valuable time.

And I had to sit down in front of all the tasks, all of the projects, on my little mental Trello board and ask myself: "What matters most? Which of these activities will you be most upset to see never happen again? Which of these outcomes can you stand to not see?"

It's a conversation I need to have with myself on a more regular basis. I recommend you try it.

----break----

--intro

Thanks for reading. I hope you loved the article, and if you did, please share it with your friends.

Check out what I've been up to lately:

----break----
--postlist

--post--
@TODO


### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 49](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/49)

--post--
### [Sublime Text (3) for PHP Developers](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/sublime-text-3-for-php-developers)

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 48](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/48)

--post--
### [Laravel Podcast Episode 30](http://www.laravelpodcast.com/episodes/13327-episode-30-trouble-trouble-trouble)

--post--
### [Better Integration Testing in Laravel 5.1: DatabaseMigrations, DatabaseTransactions, and WithoutMiddleware](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/better-integration-testing-in-laravel-5.1-databasemigrations-databasetransactions-and-withoutmiddleware)

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 47](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/47)

--post--
### [Better Integration Testing in Laravel 5.1: Model Factories](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/better-integration-testing-in-laravel-5.1-model-factories)

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 46](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/46)

--post--
### [Better Integration Testing in Laravel 5.1: Powerful Integration Tests in A Few Lines](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/better-integration-testing-in-laravel-5.1-powerful-integration-tests-in-a-few-lines)

