
--lead
The Thin Line Between Confidence and Pride

----break----
--intro

# Welcome To Part Two
It's been really exciting seeing so many folks sign up for the newsletter&mdash;please keep sharing with your friends!

If you missed the first newsletter, check it out here: [Do The Right Thing](https://send.mattstauffer.co/w/7oqTI4fwYBzWf7CJ0CgFGA).

This week I'm talking about how we can present ourselves confidently, without arrogance.


----break----
--article

## The Thin Line Between Confidence and Pride
***
I've spent most of my free time this week writing a book proposal. It started when an editor from a publishing company reached out to me to [propose](https://s3.amazonaws.com/f.cl.ly/items/382w301h2h121L1L3o3o/233497.jpg) that I write a proposal. You might think that, once the publisher has decided to ask you to write the book, you're in.

In reality, there is an entire five-page document full of questions that comes after this initial contact. The questions range from "What's your name and address?" to "What's the title and table of contents?" About a third of the questions are dedicated to proving that you are, indeed, qualified to write this book. Why are *you* the best person? What's your competition and why do you have more to offer than they do? Who would back this book and help promote it?

Answering these questions left me feeling uncomfortable, as I have every other time I've had to think about self-promotion. It's easy for me to promote others. But I&mdash;like much of my generation, I think&mdash;have such a finely tuned self-promotion-sleaziness detector that I stay away from it as far as I can. If you haven't, take a listen to The Five-Minute Geek Show episodes [15](http://fiveminutegeekshow.com/15) & [16](http://fiveminutegeekshow.com/16) to hear me muse about how my hyper-sensitive B.S.-detector is negatively impacting my business.

***

As I wrote the proposal I realized my instinct is to undersell myself. I often think about self-promotion this way: "I will promote the people around me and then I will let them promote me." This approach is similar to a teaching I love from the moral system of my faith: it's far more important to defend others than it is to defend yourself. But, of course, this leaves you defenseless, unless you are surrounded by a community of people who are also defending you. Similarly, I want to be at a place where others see the value in what I'm doing and promote it, and I'll do the same for them.

However, nobody is going to fill out this book proposal for me&mdash;and nobody should. In this moment I'm left with two options: I can intentionally downplay my level of ability on this questionnaire (because I'm afraid of seeming prideful), or I can tell the truth even if it makes me uncomfortable. What I need to learn here is that speaking the truth about myself in response to specific prompts is not boastful or pretentious; it's just telling the truth.

***

The word "humility" is often interpreted to mean thinking lowly of yourself. But humility is more accurately defined as **having a right understanding of yourself**&mdash;not only on your own, but also in relationship to those around you.

> If humility is having a right understanding of yourself, then underselling yourself isn't humility; at best, it's false humility.

So, does true humility preclude me from answering these proposal questions truthfully? Am I helping anyone or being more true to my identity when I undersell myself?

***

When I'm tempted to answer these questions in a less-than-truthful manner, it's because I'm afraid of being prideful. I'm not actually reflecting a value system that suggests you may never speak truthfully about your own merit; I'm responding out of a simplified value system I've created that says "talking good about others is always good; talking good about me is always bad." I even think, in my head, that this is humility.

So, what is pride, since it's clearly important to avoid it? Pride is **an inflated sense of your own worth.** It's the opposite, not of humility, but of false humility: both have at their core a misguided self-understanding. But pride is even more damaging, because it also includes devaluing everyone around you.

The prideful answer to the questions on this proposal would be an answer that tells an untrue story about my ability to write. The falsely humble response would be one that downplays my abilities and relationships out of fear of pride. But the genuinely humble and honest answers are those which **represent the truth with confidence**.

***

The need for responsible self-promotion and right understanding of self exists everywhere in our personal and professional lives. It's vital in performance reviews, in trying to get new work as a contractor, and in trying to get others to use your product or hire your company. It's necessary when asking for a raise, when standing up to bully or a troll, or when protecting yourself against emotional abuse. Pride does nothing in any of these situations. Pride, just like false humility, leads to failure and destruction because it sets you up with a false narrative about reality.

If you think falsely about your relationship with the world around you, your beliefs will come crashing down at some point. It may not be today, but if your thinking is out of sync with reality, there will be negative consequences.

The way to success and peace lies in a right understanding of yourself and your relationship to the world around you. Even when that means thinking that you're doing a really great job, there's nothing wrong with that. You probably are, by the way, doing a really great job.


----break----

--intro

Thanks for reading. I hope you loved the article, and if you did, please share it with your friends.

Check out what I've been up to lately:

----break----
--postlist

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 45](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/45)
"When Generalizations and Stereotypes are Helpful vs. Hurtful"

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 44](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/44)
"How you should pick your tools"

--post--
### [Advanced input & output with Artisan commands, tables, & progress bars in Laravel 5.1](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/advanced-input-output-with-artisan-commands-tables-and-progress-bars-in-laravel-5.1)
Laravel's Artisan commands can do a lot more when you understand how to get user input and pass users more information, and they just got even more powerful in 5.1.

--post--
### [Passing Parameters to Middleware in Laravel 5.1](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/passing-parameters-to-middleware-in-laravel-5.1)
Learning about Laravel 5.1 Middleware's ability to accept parameters.

--post--
### [Injecting an object (from the IOC) using Laravel Blade Service Injection](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/injecting-an-object-from-the-ioc-using-laravel-blade-service-injection)
Laravel 5.1 has a new feature that makes it easier to inject service classes into Blade templates.
