--lead
Talking about Doing the Right Thing when it's hard

----break----
--intro

# Let's Get This Thing Rolling
Thanks, friends, for joining me! I'm excited to have such a large group for my first newsletter. I'll do my best to do you proud.

It may not be normal to get started with a heavy topic, but this is what's been on my mind these days, so this is what I'm going to load on you. Please let me know your thoughts; but be gentle, this is my first newsletter. :)


----break----
--article

## Do the Right Thing
***
I set aside several hours yesterday to write this first newsletter, but the time was quickly soaked up by a mini-emergency we had with Karani. I won't go into too much detail, but one of our users alerted us to a bug which we soon discovered had affected 14 other users.

As a product owner, you never want your users to think that the data they're getting out of your app is flawed; this will erode their trust and leave them unable to rely as fully on your app. We (and our users) want our products to make their lives simpler, not more complex.

In this sort of situation, you have to make a choice: do you notify every user who was affected? Or do we think, hey, the impact was minimal&mdash;we can just fix it without notifying them?

Of course, fixing it and not telling anybody seems like the most desirable option at first glance&mdash;that way, you get to avoid the loss of trust. But if you think about it a little more deeply, you're avoiding the loss of trust that happened as a result of an *honest programming mistake* by being *dishonest* about the actual situation that you knew happened.

Acting with integrity in this situation is more important than anything. Don't bother with wondering whether or not they'll figure out; figure out what's best and operate on that. But let's walk through this logically anyway.

***

Let's say you never get caught hiding bugs from the users. Let's say the *only* impact is that their data was wrong for a short time and then you fixed it.

Even with this situation, there is still a chance for a bit of friction. Your users might start getting a sense of something being *off* when numbers are changing without any prompting.

Let's say it goes even further. Let's say they do have that sense and then they ask you: "Hey look, this number was 700 yesterday and it's 800 today. What's going on?"

Now, you're stuck. Do you respond, "Oh, we found a bug and we didn't tell you about it"? How would this affect their trust level? "We found something that has an impact on this vital piece of information that we're providing for you, and we just decided not to tell you about it because it was easier that way." That erodes trust. That is not the right decision.

Even though it's hard, the right thing to do in that situation is to tell the user who was affected. Furthermore, we at Karani choose not only to tell them that they were impacted but actually to add it to the public change log. That's a hard thing to do&mdsah;we just put in a public record that we made a mistake. It's much easier to try to brush it under the carpet, to just pretend it never happened, but that's not the *right thing* to do.

***

This lesson is not just for product owners; we operate our consultancy the same way. When we make mistakes in managing subcontractors, or we commit to timelines that aren't possible, we have to own up to it. Sometimes, not always, that actually amounts to saying, "We made a mistake here. We're going to eat the cost that it caused." We need to own our mistakes.

We had one subcontractor who went really far down a particular road that ended up wasting a lot of time. When we talked, I was really frustrated, and he told me, "Look, it's not your fault. I'm the one who went down this road the wrong way. You didn't tell me to do it. I should've known better. I'm not going to charge you for that time&mdash;also, can I make it up elsewhere?"

That didn't bring our wasted time back. But it did help me keep the project costs closer to the budget. And, more importantly, I now consider this contractor to be a trustworthy resource. I now could say, "This is the type of person that I can trust to do well in these situations in the future&mdash;even when I don't notice it. He has integrity." That's huge.

***

The same is true in my personal life. When I have interpersonal conflicts with my wife or my friends or my business partner, the easiest thing is to not talk about it.

Once again, there's that little friction of the secret that you're holding on to. If you've ever watched a movie about relationships, you'll know that holding on to secrets will eventually blow up on you later. Who hasn't ever yelled at a movie screen, "JUST TELL HIM THE SECRET NOW BEFORE IT GETS WORSE!"?

There is, of course, such a thing as too much transparency. Every employee in my company doesn't know every aspect of how every dollar in the entire company is spent. Sometimes tact and wisdom require keeping quiet about some particular piece of information. But we can always examine our silence: Why do I want to hide this? Who is it benefiting to keep it quiet? Who is it hurting?

While the simple lesson may be to just buck up and be willing to tell your clients and your customers when you do something wrong, the deeper lesson is that *doing the right thing is often hard*.

> What defines us is not that we do the right thing when it's easy, but whether we keep doing it when it's hard.

There's a scene from the Will Smith movie "Seven Pounds" in which he points out that it's not just about whether you do the right thing when it's hard, but that you do it when no one sees and when no one will ever know. This is true integrity&mdash;acting with integrity across every situation, regardless of how hard or unrewarding it may be.

That's what has been hardest for me. I'm very good at doing the right thing when everybody's going to see it. I'm getting better at doing it when nobody's going to know, but here's where I struggle: in the moment when I can do the right thing or the wrong, and no one will ever know, no one will ever see... Will I do the right thing in that moment?

----break----

--intro

Thanks for reading. I hope you loved the article, and if you did, please share it with your friends.

Check out what I've been up to lately:

----break----
--postlist

--post--
### [Five-Minute Geek Show Episode 43](http://www.fiveminutegeekshow.com/43)
"Stop Lying About Your Motivations"

--post--
### [Installing Sendy (for emails) on Laravel Forge](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/installing-sendy-for-emails-on-laravel-forge)
A-Z instructions for installing Sendy on Laravel Forge.

--post--
### [Laravel Podcast Episode 28](http://www.laravelpodcast.com/episodes/12660-episode-28-documentation-javascript-conspiracy-theories)
"Documentation, JavaScript, & Conspiracy Theories" - In this episode, the crew discusses recent improvements to the Laravel documentation, Vue.js, ECMAScript 6, and a few conspiracy theories.
