---
lastBlogSlug: introducing-laravel-echo
firstBlogSlug: how-i-created-a-password-less-email-only-authentication-system-in-laravel
lastFMGSEpisode: 84
firstFMGSEpisode: 79
lastTightenBlogSlug: the-great-tighten-experiment
firstTightenBlogSlug: react-101-building-a-gif-search-engine
lastTMGSEpisode: null 
firstTMGSEpisode: null
---

--lead
The book is so close to done I can almost taste... the... paper?

----break----
--intro

# THIS BOOK... IS... ALMOST... DONE!

The move is over. I have turned down all speaking opportunities this summer because our baby is due in July (I'm even missing Laracon US and EU, which I'm still so bummed about!)

And [the book](https://laravelupandrunning.com/) is so close to done! Just one more round of edits and then I think we're ready to send it to production! The current revision is *384 pages long*, which is crazy for a book that I intended to be 250 pages long. But to do a good job of really introducing the whole framework, it took 384 pages, so that's how long it is.

----

I have a lot of projects that haven't gotten a lot of attention since I've been writing this book: this newsletter, my blog, and so many open source projects. I've decided to take a break of at least a few months before I start up any new big projects. There's a baby coming, and that will definitely use up all of my time. But also, I want to get back into regular rhythms, and with the limited amount of expendable free time I have, I need to carefully guard that free time.

One project I've spent my early free time on is improving [the tool I use to generate these emails](https://github.com/mattstauffer/markdown-rich-email-generator). I modified it heavily to automate quite a bit of the work it takes for me to generate an email&mdash;which, I hope, might go a long way toward me sending more consistently. Plus, it could use a bit of collection pipeline love... there are a *lot* of `foreach` loops in its processing scripts. :)

----

And let's not even talk about all the projects I have around the new house. The baby's room is painted, though, so we're off to a good start!

If you haven't yet, you can [pre-order the eBook of Laravel: Up and Running](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920044116.do) and you'll get the first 12 chapters (un-edited) free, in your inbox, right away. The full book will release some time in July or August. We're close!

----

**QUICK TIP:** Did you know that you can use `console.table()` to log data to a table in your console? I used it in my [post on Laravel Echo](https://mattstauffer.co/blog/introducing-laravel-echo#subscribing-to-presence-channels-with-echo) and a lot of readers mentioned they'd lever seen that before, so try it out next time you're logging something to your browser console&mdash;it's great for logging a list of items, for example.

----break----

--intro

Check out what I've been up to lately:
